# Assessing Data Analytics
As part of the CISBA program, Data Analytics is one of the four major focuses of the curriculum. The two classes I completed in this area, Software Systems Development (CIDM 5310) and Seminar in Data Analytics (CIDM 6308), provided me with valuable but different tools and skills. I found myself excelling in some areas while recognizing opportunities for growth in others. In the following sections, I will discuss these strengths and weaknesses, along with areas I still need to explore.
## Strengths
**Software Systems Development – 5310**
I found myself showing a full understanding when it came to interpreting data from the graphs I generated. I also found I did well with adapting to learning new tools and skills. I already had basic knowledge of Python from a previous course, so learning pandas was an easy enough adjustment to make. These strengths are reflected in my final project for the course in this repository: [https://github.com/hillsera/CIDM5310-Final-Project.git](https://github.com/hillsera/CIDM5310-Final-Project). Working incrementally and building a project from ideation to a working prototype was another strength. I am used to working in this manner at work, so I would say that was my strongest area in this class. This skill came in helpful when creating the prototype for this class where I analyzed mental health trends based on age groups and compared it to whether they were getting treatment or not. The main resource I used for learning about pandas was the book The Pandas Workshop: A comprehensive guide to using Python for data analysis with real-world case studies by Blaine Bateman, Saikat Basak, Thomas V. Joseph, and William So. The chapters were broken up in easy to understand sections which made practicing and taking notes easy.

**Seminar in Data Analytics – 6308**
In the Data Analytics course, one of my strongest points was understanding why data is useful for businesses and how it can be used to help make decisions. We used Microsoft Excel a lot in this class which I already felt confident using because of work in prior courses. Again, interpreting the data was also my strong area as well as preparing data. I learned a lot of time is spent on data preparation, and while it can be tedious, I didn’t mind this part. Finally, using Tableau was also a strength, mostly due to its easy UI. I felt it was easy and straightforward to use. Excel was useful for cleaning and structuring raw datasets, while Tableau allowed me to quickly communicate insights through visualizations. My files demonstrating these strengths are in the following repository: [https://github.com/hillsera/CIDM-6308.git](https://github.com/hillsera/CIDM-6308.git). The book, Data Science for Business: What You Need to Know about Data Mining and Data-Analytic Thinking by Foster Provost and Tom Fawcett was referenced a lot in the course, along with assigned courses on the Datacamp website.
## Weaknesses
**Software Systems Development – 5310**
While learning about pandas came easily, knowing how to use it efficiently was where I struggled. Learning a new language often requires knowing how to research solutions effectively. At times, I wasn’t sure what questions to ask when researching solutions, which made it difficult to build project components efficiently. Also, using Python and Pandas for data visualization was an area I wasn’t completely confident in. I could generate graphs but manipulating them in a way to make them easier to read was something I struggled with. This is shown in the jupyter notebook file in this repo: [https://github.com/hillsera/CIDM5310-Final-Project.git](https://github.com/hillsera/CIDM5310-Final-Project.git), specifically cells 12, 44, 45, 55 to name a few. It’s a lot different having to use code for manual setting changes vs. clicking in a UI. For these areas in which I struggled, I used the required textbook mentioned in the strengths section, but I also did a lot of research on Google and Stack Overflow to help understand potential solutions and what was going wrong with my code.

**Seminar in Data Analytics – 6308**
Regarding this course, my challenges were less with the tools themselves and more with the underlying concepts. I struggled with knowing what machine learning algorithm was best for various situations. Also, I struggled with understanding and building predictive classification models. Furthermore, I had a hard time working with time-series data like decomposition and moving averages when trying to forecast trends with data. The file regarding this particular skill is found in this repo: [https://github.com/hillsera/CIDM-6308.git](https://github.com/hillsera/CIDM-6308.git) in the softdrink-finished.xlsx file. More research and practice with these concepts and methods would help. With continued exposure, I can build confidence in applying these methods effectively for the weak areas I mentioned above.
## What I wish I Knew
From the assessment above, I would benefit from strengthening my fundamental knowledge of Python and pandas, along with gaining more practice in machine learning and statistical concepts. Becoming more comfortable with predictive modeling and time-series analysis would help solidify these skills. Creating my own projects that combine these areas would give me the chance to apply what I’ve learned, address my weaker points, and build confidence in using these methods effectively.
## Capabilities and Preparedness Summary 
With the foundational knowledge I gained from these two courses, I am confident in my ability to apply data analytics to solve business problems, both in the Capstone Project and in potential professional settings. I have a strong grasp of the concepts, tools, and methods needed to analyze and interpret data effectively, and I am prepared to leverage these skills in future projects. While I feel slightly underprepared when it comes to executing projects entirely with code, I am confident that with continued practice, I can build functional prototypes and integrate this work successfully into my portfolio and Capstone Project.
## Integration With Other Areas
Data Analytics is closely connected with the other focuses of the CISBA program. The skills I have gained allow me to manipulate data, forecast trends, and create more effective solutions for customers. While data analytics may not always be the first step in a project, it enables us to leverage data effectively. Data Management provides the structure and control needed to store and organize data, Software Systems allows us to build applications and components to perform analysis, and Networking and Cybersecurity ensure that data is stored securely and protected from unauthorized access or misuse. In the project for CIDM 5310, I applied data analytics (analyze mental health trends), database management (create an entry point through an API and build a local SQL database) and use software tools to build functional prototypes (Python and pandas in a Jupyter Notebook) that demonstrate how these sections work together.
## Final Thoughts
Upon reflection of this Data Analytics assessment, I’ve built a strong foundation to support a successful capstone project. I will need to spend more time and effort learning how to build the prototype effectively. I plan to aid myself in that area by reviewing and practicing regularly with Python and other libraries necessary.